automatic troubleshooting endpoint context docs (#728)
elastic/endpoint-package: package/endpoint/docs/knowledge_base/bsod/windows_bsod_endpoint_driver.md

---
type: automatic_troubleshooting
sub_type: bsod
os: [Windows]
date: '2026-03-09'
---

## Symptom

A Windows system running Elastic Defend experiences a Blue Screen of Death (BSOD) or kernel crash. The memory dump analysis references `elastic_endpoint_driver.sys` or `elastic-endpoint-driver.sys`. The crash may occur shortly after an agent upgrade, 3rd party security product installation or its configuration change, during heavy I/O workloads, or after the system has been running for some time with many network connections. In severe cases the system enters a boot loop.

## Summary

Elastic Defend uses a kernel-mode driver (`elastic_endpoint_driver.sys`) for file system filtering, network monitoring, and process/object callbacks. Most BSOD issues traced to the endpoint driver fall into a few categories: regressions introduced in specific driver versions, conflicts with other kernel-mode drivers (third-party security products), or running on unsupported OS versions.

> Collecting a full kernel memory dump and sharing it with Elastic Support is essential for root-cause determination. The bugcheck code alone is not sufficient — the faulting call stack identifies which code path triggered the crash.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Collecting a full kernel memory dump and sharing it with Elastic Support is essential for root-cause determination. The bugcheck code alone is not sufficient — the faulting call stack identifies which code path triggered the crash. Just because Elastic Defend is in the calls stack does not mean it is responsible for the crash.
```

---
type: automatic_troubleshooting
sub_type: bsod
os: [Windows]
date: '2026-03-09'
---

## Symptom

> A Windows system running Elastic Defend experiences a Blue Screen of Death (BSOD) or kernel crash. The memory dump analysis references `elastic_endpoint_driver.sys` or `elastic-endpoint-driver.sys`. Common bugcheck codes include `IRQL_NOT_LESS_OR_EQUAL`, `KERNEL_MODE_HEAP_CORRUPTION` (0x13A), `SYSTEM_SERVICE_EXCEPTION` (0x3B), or `PAGE_FAULT_IN_NONPAGED_AREA`. The crash may occur shortly after an agent upgrade, during heavy I/O workloads, or after the system has been running for some time with many network connections. In severe cases the system enters a boot loop.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Windows system running Elastic Defend experiences a Blue Screen of Death (BSOD) or kernel crash. The memory dump analysis references `elastic_endpoint_driver.sys` or `elastic-endpoint-driver.sys`. The crash may occur shortly after an agent upgrade, 3rd party security product installation or it's configuration change, during heavy I/O workloads, or after the system has been running for some time with many network connections. In severe cases the system enters a boot loop.
```

I don't think we're commonly causing crashes, so this sentence makes absolutely no sense to me.

### ODX-enabled volume crash (8.19.8, 9.1.8, 9.2.2)

A regression introduced in versions 8.19.8, 9.1.8, and 9.2.2 causes BSODs on systems with ODX (Offloaded Data Transfer) enabled volumes, particularly affecting Hyper-V clusters and Windows Server 2016 Datacenter. The crash occurs in the file system filter driver's post-FsControl handler (`bkPostFsControl`) when processing offloaded write completions. The faulting call stack typically shows `elastic_endpoint_driver!bkPostFsControl` followed by `FLTMGR!FltGetStreamContext`.

The crash can appear 2-3 hours after an agent upgrade, often triggered when the storage subsystem processes asynchronous offload write operations.

**Affected versions**: 8.19.8, 9.1.8, 9.2.2 only.

**Fixed version**: 9.2.4.

**Mitigation**: Downgrade to the prior agent version (e.g. 9.2.1) until the upgrade to 9.2.4+ can be performed.

### Third-party kernel driver conflicts

Other security products running kernel-mode drivers can interfere with Elastic Defend's driver initialization or runtime operation. The most commonly reported conflicts include:

> - **Trellix Access Control**: Trellix's kernel driver can intercept the Windows Base Filtering Engine (BFE) service, causing Defend's WFP (Windows Filtering Platform) driver initialization to hang or take an extremely long time. When another thread within Defend tasks the kernel driver before initialization completes, the system crashes. The call stack typically shows `elastic_endpoint_driver!HandleIrpDeviceControl` calling `bkRegisterCallbacks` with `KeAcquireGuardedMutex` on an uninitialized mutex. This interaction was introduced by a WFP driver refactor in 8.16.0. Fixed in 8.17.6, 8.18.1, and 9.0.1. Workaround: disable Trellix Access Protection or add a Trellix exclusion for the BFE service (`svchost.exe`).

Reviewer 3: I don't think that's a good recommendation to give a customer after the fixed versions were released.  At this point the recommendation should be to upgrade.
